[Data][Docs] Split "Consuming data" guide (#36121)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/inspecting-data.rst

.. _inspecting-data:

===============
Inspecting data
===============

.. _describing-datasets:

Describing datasets
===================

:class:`Datasets <ray.data.Dataset>` are tabular. To view a Dataset's column names and
types, call :meth:`Dataset.schema() <ray.data.Dataset.schema>`.

.. testcode::

    import ray

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("s3://anonymous@air-example-data/iris.csv")

    print(ds.schema())

.. testoutput::

    Column             Type
    ------             ----
    sepal length (cm)  double
    sepal width (cm)   double
    petal length (cm)  double
    petal width (cm)   double
    target             int64

For more information such as the number of rows, print the Dataset.

.. testcode::

    import ray

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("s3://anonymous@air-example-data/iris.csv")

    print(ds)

.. testoutput::

    Dataset(
       num_blocks=...,
       num_rows=150,
       schema={
          sepal length (cm): double,
          sepal width (cm): double,
          petal length (cm): double,
          petal width (cm): double,
          target: int64
       }
    )

.. _inspecting-rows:

> Inspecting rows

Reviewer: also mention take_all somewhere?

.. _inspecting-data:

===============
Inspecting data
===============

> 

Reviewer: can you add a sentence or 2 about what this guide covers? Just consistent pattern with the other user guides.

.. _describing-datasets:

Describing datasets
===================

:class:`Datasets <ray.data.Dataset>` are tabular. To view a Dataset's column names and
types, call :meth:`Dataset.schema() <ray.data.Dataset.schema>`.

.. testcode::

    import ray

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("s3://anonymous@air-example-data/iris.csv")

    print(ds.schema())

.. testoutput::

    Column             Type
    ------             ----
    sepal length (cm)  double
    sepal width (cm)   double
    petal length (cm)  double
    petal width (cm)   double
    target             int64

For more information such as the number of rows, print the Dataset.

.. testcode::

    import ray

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("s3://anonymous@air-example-data/iris.csv")

    print(ds)

.. testoutput::

    Dataset(
       num_blocks=...,
       num_rows=150,
       schema={
          sepal length (cm): double,
          sepal width (cm): double,
          petal length (cm): double,
          petal width (cm): double,
          target: int64
       }
    )

.. _inspecting-rows:

Inspecting rows
===============

> To inspect rows, call :meth:`Dataset.take() <ray.data.Dataset.take>` or

Reviewer: Just add a little bit more on what this is doing? To inspect rows, call ..., which returns a list of rows from the Dataset.

> :meth:`Dataset.take_all() <ray.data.Dataset.take_all>`. Ray Data represents rows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:meth:`Dataset.take_all() <ray.data.Dataset.take_all>`. Ray Data represents each row as a dictionary
```

as dictionaries.

.. testcode::

    import ray

    ds = ray.data.read_csv("s3://anonymous@air-example-data/iris.csv")

    rows = ds.take(1)
    print(rows)

.. testoutput::

    [{'sepal length (cm)': 5.1, 'sepal width (cm)': 3.5, 'petal length (cm)': 1.4, 'petal width (cm)': 0.2, 'target': 0}]

For more information on working with rows, see
:ref:`Transforming rows <transforming-rows>` and
:ref:`Iterating over rows <iterating-over-rows>`.

.. _inspecting-batches:

Inspecting batches
==================

A batch contains data from multiple rows. To inspect batches, call
`Dataset.take_batch() <ray.data.Dataset.take_batch>`. By default, Ray Data represents

> batches as ndarrays.

Reviewer: Dictionary of Numpy ndarray. You can set the `"batch_format"` to change the format of the returned batch.

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: NumPy

        .. testcode::

            import ray

            ds = ray.data.read_images("example://image-datasets/simple")

            batch = ds.take_batch(batch_size=2, batch_format="numpy")
            print(batch)

        .. testoutput::

>             {'image': array([[[[...]]]], dtype=uint8)}

Reviewer: can we show something more meaningful as the output here?

possibly using a different dataset if images are too complicated
